---
created: 2019-05-01
last updated: 2019-05-01
status: To be reviewed
title: Enable authoritative http downloads using .netrc 
authors:
  - genrym
---


# Abstract
This document describes an extension of the `SkylarkRepositoryContextApi.downladAndExtract` to enable HTTP downloads which
require authorization, using the [.netrc](https://www.gnu.org/software/inetutils/manual/html_node/The-_002enetrc-file.html) 
file specification as storage for the credentials.


# Background
Currently, when using the rule _http_archive_ for specifying a download, it is possible to download any anonymously open url.
However, if the url requires _Authorization_ for the download (be it _Basic Authentication_, _OAuth2_,...) - there is no such
option. Such an example can be download a source zip from private github repository.


# Proposal
We can use the _.netrc_ file to store credentials for _Authorization_ per host / domain.

Example of .netrc file contents:
```
machine github.com password my-auth-token
machine basic-auth.com login myuser password my-password
```

For token based authentication, we can use the `password` field to specify the authorization token / API key.

We will add the following properties to _http_archive_ rule and `SkylarkRepositoryContextApi.downloadAndExtract`:
- netrc_file_path : String
  - the location of the _.netrc_ file. Default location for the _.netrc_ file will be the user home directory, e.g. 
  `/Users/<username>/.netrc`
- netrc_domain_auth_types : SkylarkDict
  - mapping between a domain / host (which correlates to the _.netrc_ file definition) to _authorization type_, e.g.
    Basic Authentication, OAuth2, custom prefix. Default will be an empty dictionary.
  - we use a mapping here to allow different hosts / domains as sources for the same file, which might have different authorization protocols / credentials

Example of _http_archive_ rule definition:
```
http_archive(
    name = 'somefile',
    url = 'https://basic-auth.com/somefile.zip',
    sha256 = '87569EEA3732D8A11DCFC8293D08A443D79CE34CD4996822DD3D26F8F46ECEE0',
    type = 'zip',
    netrc_file_path = '/Users/user/.netrc',
    netrc_domain_auth_types = {
      "basic-auth.com": "basic"
    },
)
```
The result will be, that the http call will be sent with _Authorization_ header with the value `Basic base64(login:password)`,
specifically in this case, given the _.netrc_ file example above: `Basic bXl1c2VyOm15LXBhc3N3b3Jk`, according to 
[rfc2617](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2617#page-5)

## Authorization Type Format
In order to support various authorization protocols which might also require some custom properties, e.g. a custom prefix 
protocol, which requires the prefix to be supplied as additional parameter to the authorization protocol definition, we can define the following format for the _authorization type_ value, where the additional properties are optional:

### Alt.1

`<type>[:<prop1>=<val1>,<prop2>=<val2>,...]`

Using the _.netrc_ file example definition above, the defintion of _http_archive_ rule will look like the 
following for custom prefix protocol. Taking github as example, which uses a non-standard authorization protocol:
```
http_archive(
    name = 'somefile',
    url = 'https://www.github.com/.../somefile.zip',
    sha256 = '87569EEA3732D8A11DCFC8293D08A443D79CE34CD4996822DD3D26F8F46ECEE0',
    type = 'zip',
    netrc_file_path = '/Users/user/.netrc',
    netrc_domain_auth_types = {
      "github.com": "custom_prefix:prefix=token"
    },
)
```
The result will be, that the http call will be sent with _Authorization_ header with the value `token my-auth-token`.

### Alt.2: 
```
{
   "type": "<type>",
   "props": {
      "<prop1>": "<val1>",
      "<prop2>": "<val2>",
      ...
   }
}
```

Not sure whether it can be achievable with the SkylarkDict type:
```
http_archive(
    name = 'somefile',
    url = 'https://www.github.com/.../somefile.zip',
    sha256 = '87569EEA3732D8A11DCFC8293D08A443D79CE34CD4996822DD3D26F8F46ECEE0',
    type = 'zip',
    netrc_file_path = '/Users/user/.netrc',
    netrc_domain_auth_types = {
      "github.com": {
         "type": "custom_prefix",
         "props": {
            "prefix": "token"
         }
      }
    },
)
```


# Backward-compatibility
The new configuration will be used only if explicitly defined per specific host / domain, thus is backward compatible.
