---
created: 2019-04-29
last updated: 2019-04-29
status: approved
title: Forcing non-cache-hits in the repository cache
authors:
  - aehlig
---


# Abstract

This document describes an extension of the repository build API that can
be used to artifically avoid cache hits in the repository cache.

# Background

## External Repositories

Bazel requires a view of the whole dependency graph. But not everybody organizes
their source code in a single repository. Therefore, bazel has the concept of
external repositories to specify additional parts of the source tree to be
fetched from some other location.

## Repository Cache

Several projects, especially related ones, often depend on the same external
resources. To avoid re-downloading them for every project, bazel has a cache,
shared between all workspaces, of downloaded files, indexed by their hash.

It is good practice, for reasons of security and hermeticity, to specify
a hash of any external file needed. Therefore, those hashes are available
anyway for most downloads, making the cache work efficiently.

## Downloads with non-authoritative hash

Upon updating external dependencies, sometimes it is forgotten to update the
hash as well, leading to cache hits not desired by the user
([#5045](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel/issues/5045),
 [#6089](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel/issues/6089)).
This is especially confusing, if the download is only indirectly through
a different rule (e.g., `maven_jar`) where a canonical identifier is available,
and the hash is considered only a security measure
([#5144](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel/issues/5144),
 [#5250](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel/issues/5250)).

# Proposal

To avoid such unintended cache hits, it was requested to artifically
split the cache. We propose to do it in the following way.

## API extension

The repository-context functions `download` and `download_and_extract` are
extended by an additional optional parameter `canonicial_id`. If this parameter
is set to a non-empty string, a file is taken only from cache, if the a
file for the logical pair consisting of hash and `canonical_id`
is already in the logical cache; such a pair enters the logical cache, if a
file with that hash is downloaded via a `download` or `download_and_extract`
request specifying that `canonical_id`.

## On-disk representation of the cache

We do not want to store the same file several times on disk. Moreover, we
want a file downloaded with a `canonical_id` also be available in cache for
requests asking for a hash only. Therefore, we still store the files by
hash, as we currently do, and only add the additional information by which
`canonical_id`s a file is known by. As the on-disk format uses one directory per
hashed file, we can directly add the information there. To avoid having
conflicts when updating the list, we use one file per `canonical_id`. More
precisely, we add a file where the name `id-` followed by the hash of the
`canonical_id`; the content of the file will be the `canonical_id` itself.
As the hash is assummed to be sufficiently secure, there won't be any
name clashes, also not with the payload entry called `file`. Moreover, using
(essentially) the hash rather than the id avoids problems with very long
`canonical_id`s and with difficult characters in the `canonical_id`,
including `/`.

### Limitations

The approach of artificially splitting the cache has several limitations users
should be aware of.

- Unintended Fragmentation: if several rules (or variants thereof used
  by different projects) refer to the same file via a different `canonical_id`,
  it will be downloaded once for every such identifier. In particular, URLs
  don't work well as canonical identifieres for archives distributed via
  different organisations.

- Bazel has no means of verifying the canonical id; it is purely declarative
  from bazel's point of view. So, if a an incorrect use of a rule specifies
  an unintended pair of `canonical_id` and URL, bazel will add whatever file
  downloaded from there to the logical cache. That will be available for
  future cache hits.

# Backward-compatibility

The change adds a new optional argument to `ctx.download` and
`ctx.download_and_extract`. If the argument is not provided, the behavior
does not change. So the proposed change is backwards compatible.
