---
created: 2019-05-27
last updated: 2019-05-27
status: To be reviewed
title: Template for proposals
authors:
  - aehlig
---


# Abstract

This document describes a proposal to add authentication to downloads
by bazel during the creation of external repositories. It is the outcome
of a discusion in the bazel team, based on an earlier [proposal on
http downloads using `.netrc`](2019-05-01-http-auth.md) and the [email
discussion](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!topic/bazel-dev/oXSQfq7W0jM)
on said proposal.

# Background

Bazel uses [external
repositories](https://docs.bazel.build/versions/master/external.html) to import
dependencies that are not part of the main repository. Those external
dependencies often are standard open-source libraries, but not in all cases;
sometimes they are repositories private to a company or some other organisation.
In the latter case, usually some form of authentication (on top of being in the
right network) is required when accessing those sources.

When fetching external resources, bazel supports two fundamental mechanisms,
- bazel can be asked to download a file, possibly with a specified hash, from
  one of a specified list of URLs (taking whichever is best reachable), and
- bazel can be told to call an external program like `git`.
In the latter case, obviously authentication can happen by whatever mechanism
the external program supports. The former case, however, is often preferred, as
in that way bazel's caching mechanism, that is shared between all workspaces,
can be used. The API function to tell bazel to download a file is `download`
from the repository context. Currently, it does not support authentication.

# Proposal

The proposed API change is to extend the repository-context functions `download`
and `download_and_extract` by an additional, optional (with default value `{}`)
parameter `auth`. This parameter has to be a `dict`. For every URL specified to
download from, if it is a key of that `dict`, then the value has to be a `dict`
as well, with one entry `"type"` and other entries depending on the value
of the the specified type. For the type `"basic"`, the additional entries are
`"login"` and `"password"` with the obvious semantics.

For example, a call telling bazel to download a file could look as follows.
```
ctx.download(
  urls = ["https://company-mirror.example.com/files/data.txt",
          "http://public.example.org/files/data.txt",
          "ftp://public.example.org/files/data.txt",
         ],
  sha256 = "e3b0c44298fc1c149afbf4c8996fb92427ae41e4649b934ca495991b7852b855",
  auth = {"https://company-mirror.example.com/files/data.txt" :
             {"type" : "basic",
              "login" : "allice",
              "password" : "thisismysecret",
              },
           "ftp://public.example.org/files/data.txt" :
             {"type" : "basic",
              "login" : "anonymous",
              "password" : "alice@example.com",
              },
           })
```
In this example, the `auth` aparamter would specify, that the same file could
be obtained from `company-mirror.example.com` via `https` using a proper
user name and password, but also form `public.example.org`, either via `http`
without authentification, or via standard anonyomous `ftp`.

Of course, the authentication dictionary would not be committed into the
workspace; it would only be constructed by the rule in memory from some
form of credential store, e.g., a
[`.netrc`](https://www.gnu.org/software/inetutils/manual/html_node/The-_002enetrc-file.html)
file. So simplify that use case, a Starlark function will be provided to compute
that dictonary from a list of URLs and a path to a `.netrc` file.

# Considerations

The proposed change to the API is deliberately minimal, explicit, and agnostic
to the actual mechanism the credentials are stored. The reason for this design
choice are the following.

- The `.netrc` file format is not the only way to store credentials on disk. By
  separating off parsing of the credential file and moving it to Starlark,
  adaptions and support for other file formats is more easy and in control of
  the user (without requring additional changes to the build API).

- The approach of being very explicit about for which URLs authentication is
  needed, instead of having a global default through a side channel (like an
  option specifying a `.netrc` file), ensures that authentication is only used
  where desired. While a `.netrc` files specifies which credential to use for
  which domain, and, in general, a download providing basic auth credentials
  will also be successfull if none are needed, eagerly providing credentials
  might still be a problem. Consider a domain, say a git-hosting site,
  that contains both, private and public repositories. Then, accessing the
  private repositories will require credentials, so the domain will be
  in the `.netrc` file. The same hosting site, on the other hand, might also
  provide public repositories added to the workspace by rules (via the
  `*_deps()` pattern). For those, the rule author might decide to use
  plain `http` URLs (instead of `https`) to avoid the SSL-handshake overhead,
  using that the SHA256 hash of the file is enough to ensure integrity.
  Now, eagerly providing the available credentials will not make the download
  fail, but stil cause an unintended clear-text transmission.

- By moving the logic to Starlark as far as possible, extensions are more
  easy. In particular, related feature requests, like URL-rewriting to go
  through a local mirror, can be implemented in pure Starlark and are
  hence out of scope of this proposal.

# Backward-compatibility

If the additional parameter `auth` is not given, the functions `download`
and `download_and_extract` behave the same way as before. So this is a
fully backwards-compatible extension.
